QEP 3: multidimensional array proposal (#49)
microsoft/qsharp-language: Approved/3-multidimensional-arrays.md

```

Example 2:
Mixing 1D and multidimensional arrays.

```qsharp
// Here, we declare the first two levels of indexing as being rectangular,
// resulting in a three-dimensional array.
let data = [
    |
        // After rows, [] denote arrays as elements again.
        | [0], [1, 2] |,
        | [3, 4, 5], [6, 7, 8, 9] |
    |,

    |
        | [10, 11, 12, 13, 14], [15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20] |,
        | [21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27], [28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35] |
    |
];
// data is of type [||[Int]||] (that is, a three-dimensional array of arrays of integers)
// In the zero-th "plane", first "row", zero-th "column", get the element with index 2.
Message($"{data[0, 1, 0][2]}"); // ← 5
```

Example 3:
Using expressions as subarrays of multidimensional arrays results in a compile-time error.

```qsharp
let a = [2, 3];
// The following is a compile-time error, as `|0, 1|` is not an expression
// independent of its surrounding `[]` brackets.
let data = [
    | 0, 1 |,
    a
];
// Using new library functions that can `fail` at runtime, however, we can
// achieve the desired effect.
// In particular, JaggedAsRectangular2<'T>(jagged : 'T[][]) -> [|'T|] allows

> // us to build a [|Int|] value from `a`, which we can then join to `data` using

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// us to build a [|Int|] value from `a`, which we can then join to get `data` using
```

```qsharp
open Microsoft.Quantum.Arrays;

function ElementaryMatrix<'T>(
    (nRows : Int, nColumns : Int),
    (idxRow : Int, idxCol : Int),
    zero : 'T, one : 'T
) : 'T[][] {
    mutable matrix = ConstantArray(
        nRows,
        ConstantArray(nCols, zero)
    );
    return matrix w/ row <- (matrix[row] w/ col <- one);
}

let e01 = ElementaryMatrix((2, 2), (0, 1), 0.0, 1.0);
// e01: Double[][] = [[0.0, 1.0], [0.0, 0.0]]
```

## Proposed Modification

Building on the utility of 1-D array notation, this suggestion proposes modifying Q# to include new multidimensional array types `[|'T`|], `[||'T||]`, and so forth. Like values of type `'T[]`, these new multidimensional would also be immutable, and could be manipulated by using the subscript (`[]`) and copy-and-update (`w/`) operators.

For any type `'T`, this proposal introduces a new two-dimensional array type `[|'T|]`, a three-dimensional array type `[||'T||]`, and so forth.
For consistency with these new types, this proposal also introduces `['T]` as alternative notation for `'T[]`; we will use new notation for `'T[]` in the remainder of the proposal.

> New values of type `[|'T|]` can be written as literals using `[ [| ... |] ]` delimiters instead of `[]`, while literals of type `[||'T||]` can be written using `[ [| [| ... |] |] ]` delimiters (see example 1 below).

Reviewer: It would be good to add a sentence to this paragraph that they can also be constructed using library functions, listing the public functions for array construction further below with the list of internal library functions.

The `[|` and `|]` delimeters can be thought of as denoting a rectangular grid, and as constraining one level of indexing to be rectangular.

Within multidimensional array literals, it is a _compile-time_ error to declare jagged subarrays, such as in Example 1, below.
It is similarly a compile-time error to use a non-literal array expression for part of a mutlidimensional array literal, as is shown in Example 3, below.

Multidimensional arrays can also be created using extensions of the functionality in QEP 2.
For example, `[| element, size=(2, 3) |]` is equivalent to `[ [|element, element, element|], [|element, element, element|] ]`.

Elements of a value of type `[|'T|]` can be retrieved using the subscript operator `[]` with a value of type `(Int, Int)` as the index, as in `data[(0, 1)]`.
For brevity, the parentheses marking the tuple can be dropped in this case, such that `data[(0, 1)]` and `data[0, 1]` are completely equivalent.
Similarly, elements of a value of type `[||'T||]` can be retrieved by subscripting with indices of type `(Int, Int, Int)`.

> Multidimensional indices can also be used with the copy-and-update operator (`w/`) to replace elements of multidimensional arrays, as shown in Example 4 below.

Author: Done.

Note that in the case of `w/` operators, the `()` around index tuples cannot be dropped.

As with one-dimensional arrays, multidimensional arrays can also be subscripted by ranges.
Each axis of a multidimensional arrays can be sliced by _either_ a value of type `Range` or a value of type `Int`; for example, `(Int, Int)`, `(Range, Int)`, `(Int, Range)`, and `(Range, Range)` are valid subscripts for a value of type `[|'T|]`.
As shown in Example 5 below, for each `Int` in an index tuple, the dimensionality (aka rank) of the array is reduced by one.
That is, indexing a `[|'T|]` by `(Range, Range)` returns a rank-2 array (`[|'T|]`), while indexing by `(Int, Range)` or `(Range, Int)` returns an ordinary rank-1 array (`[|'T|]`).
Just as with indices like `(Int, Int)` and `(Int, Int, Int)`, subscripts that return slices can also be used in copy-and-replace expressions, as shown in Example 6.
When using `Range` values to index one or more axes in a multidimensional array, `...` is shorthand the `Range` value `0..1..(n - 1)` where `n` is the length of the axes being indexed.

> When used in `for` loops, multidimensional arrays iterate "on the left," yielding loop variables of one rank lower than the array being looped over, as shown in Example 7, below.

Reviewer: Ok, resolved per our discussion. It might be useful to state explicitly that 
```qsharp
for row in arr2D { 
    // ...
}
```
is merely a short form for  
```qsharp
for i in 0 .. Fst(Size(arr2D) - 1) {
    let row = arr2D[i, ...];
    // ...
}
```

> When used in `for` loops, multidimensional arrays iterate "on the left," yielding loop variables of one rank lower than the array being looped over, as shown in Example 7, below.

Author: Sounds good, will do so.

> When used in `for` loops, multidimensional arrays iterate "on the left," yielding loop variables of one rank lower than the array being looped over, as shown in Example 7, below.

Author: Modified example 7 to make this explicit.

- `internal function AsNDArray3<'TElement>(data : ['TElement], strides : [Int], offset : Int, shape : [Int]) : [||'TElement||]`
- `internal function AsNDArray4<'TElement>(data : ['TElement], strides : [Int], offset : Int, shape : [Int]) : [|||'TElement|||]`
- `internal function AsNDArray5<'TElement>(data : ['TElement], strides : [Int], offset : Int, shape : [Int]) : [||||'TElement||||]`
- `internal function AsNDArray6<'TElement>(data : ['TElement], strides : [Int], offset : Int, shape : [Int]) : [|||||'TElement|||||]`
- `internal function AsNDArray7<'TElement>(data : ['TElement], strides : [Int], offset : Int, shape : [Int]) : [||||||'TElement||||||]`
- `internal function AsNDArray8<'TElement>(data : ['TElement], strides : [Int], offset : Int, shape : [Int]) : [|||||||'TElement|||||||]`
- `internal function NDArrayData<'TElement, 'TArray>(data : 'TArray) : ['TElement]`
- `internal function NDArrayStrides<'TArray>(data : 'TArray) : [Int]`
- `internal function NDArrayShape<'TArray>(data : 'TArray) : [Int]`
- `internal function NDArrayOffset<'TArray>(data : 'TArray) : Int`

> Each of these five functions would be `body intrinsic;`, and together form the contract between the runtime and the core Q# libraries needed to support this proposed feature (see Example 7, below). By necessity, these functions are "unsafe," in that direct access to these functions would allow violating invariants of multidimensional arrays or bypass the type system to expose runtime failures, necessitating the `internal` modifier.

Reviewer: There are more than 5 functions listed here, and I'd like to find a way to not have to support AsNDArray* as intrinsic. I'd also suggest to rename `NDArrayShape` to `NDArraySize`.

Author: My thought was that the return types being different in each case would require separate callables, but we could apply the same trick of using unsafe type parameters:

```
internal function UnsafeAsNDArray<'TElement, 'TArray>(data : ['TElement], strides : [Int], offset : Int, shape : [Int]) : 'TArray {
    body intrinsic;
}

internal function AsNDArray2<'TElement>(data : ['TElement], strides : [Int], offset : Int, shape : [Int]) : [|'TElement|] {
    return UnsafeAsNDArray<'TElement, [|'TElement|]>(data, strides, offset, shape);
}
```

> ### Examples

Reviewer: Please update the literal syntax in all of these examples before I take a closer look (delimiter `|` instead of `[|` and `|]`).

Author: Done.

    [|
        [|0, 1|],
        [|2, 3|]
    |],

    [|
        [|4, 5|],
        [|6, 7|]
    |]
];
Message($"{data[0, 1, 0]}"); // ← 6
```

Example 2:
Mixing 1D and multidimensional arrays.

```qsharp
// Here, we declare the first two levels of indexing as being rectangular,
// resulting in a three-dimensional array.
let data = [
    [|
        // After rows, [] denote arrays as elements again.
        [| [0], [1, 2] |],
        [| [3, 4, 5], [6, 7, 8, 9] |]
    |],

    [|
        [| [10, 11, 12, 13, 14], [15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20] |],
        [| [21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27], [28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35] |]
    |]
];
// data: [||[Int]||] (that is, a three-dimensional array of arrays of integers)
// Get the zero-th "plane," first "row", zeroth "column," and third element.
Message($"{data[0, 1, 0][2]}"); // ← 5
```

Example 3:
Using expressions as subarrays of multidimensional arrays results in a compile-time error.

```qsharp
let a = [2, 3];
// The following is a compile-time error, since `a` is not a 1D array literal
// of length 2.
let data = [
    [| 0, 1 |],
    a
];
// Using a new library function that can `fail` at runtime works, however.

> let data = Concatenated(0, // concatenate along the 0th (row) axis

Reviewer: It would be nice to list the public library functions for array construction as well (of course the list won't be binding, and will be reviewed as part of the libraries API meeting).

    [ [| 0, 1 |] ],
    a
);
// data: [|Int|] = [
//     [|0, 1|],
//     [|2, 3|]
// ];
```

Example 4:
Using the copy-and-replace operator to manipulate multidimensional arrays.

```qsharp
function ElementaryMatrix(
    (nRows : Int, nCols : Int), (idxRow : Int, idxCol : Int)
) : [|Double|] {
    return ConstantArray2((nRows, nCols), 0.0) w/ (idxRow, idxCol) <- 1.0;
}
```

Example 5:
Slicing multidimensional arrays by ranges.

```qsharp
let data = [
    [|0, 1, 2|],
    [|3, 4, 5|],
    [|6, 7, 8|]
];

// Slicing an index by a Range does not reduce the dimensionality
// of the resulting array.
let corners = data[0..2..2, 0..2..2];
// corners: [|Int|] = [[|0, 2|], [|6, 8|]]

// Subscripting by an Int reduces the dimensionality of the resulting array;
// here, since our index has one Int, the dimensionality reduces from
// [|Int|] to [Int].
let firstRow = data[0, ...];

> // firstRow: [Int] = [0, 1, 2]

Reviewer: The notation of type = value might be confusing.
```suggestion
// firstRow = [0, 1, 2]
```

// The same pattern holds no matter which index we subscript with an Int.
let firstColumn = data[..., 0];
// firstColumn = [0, 3, 6]

let data3 = [
    [|
        [|0, 1, 2|],
        [|3, 4, 5|],
        [|6, 7, 8|]
    |],

    [|
        [|9, 10, 11|],
        [|12, 13, 14|],
        [|15, 16, 17|]
    |],

    [|
        [|18, 19, 20|],
        [|21, 22, 23|],
        [|24, 25, 26|]
    |]
];
let corners3 = data3[0..2..2, 0..2..2, 0..2..2];

> // corners3: [||Int||]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// corners3 is of type [||Int||]
```

let firstPlane = data3[0, ..., ...];

> // firstPlane: [|Int|]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// firstPlane is of type [|Int|]
```

let firstRowOfFirstPlane = data3[0, 0, ...];

> // firstRowOfFirstPlane: [Int] = [0, 1, 2]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// firstRowOfFirstPlane = [0, 1, 2] and is of type [Int]
```

```

Example 6:
Using multidimensional slices in copy-and-update expressions.

```qsharp

> let zeros = ConstantArray2((3, 3), 0);

Reviewer: I'd suggest to update this to use the new array expression by default: 
```suggestion
let zeros =[|0, size = (3, 3)|]);
```
It is also a bit unfortunate that the order of arguments for ConstantArray is reversed compared to the new array expression, but I realize that this is the way it currently is for the 1D case.

Author: Yes, as `ConstantArray` predates QEP2. It's still useful to have that function around for mapping and partial application, but I agree that I'd expect QEP2 to be used more going forward.

let withCorners = zeros w/ (0..2..2, 0..2..2) <- #[[1, 2], [3, 4]];

> // withCorners: [|Int|] = [ [|1, 0, 2|], [|0, 0, 0|], [|3, 0, 4|] ]

Reviewer: Same here regarding the type = value notation; could you please update these?

Author: Done.

Example 7:
Implementing array library functions using internal functions.

```qsharp
namespace Microsoft.Quantum.Arrays {
    open Microsoft.Quantum.Diagnostics;

    function Transposed2<'T>(array : [|'T|]) : [|'T|] {
        // Start by deconstructing the input using the internal intrinsic
        // functions from this proposal; see Implementation below.
        let data = NDArrayData<'T, [|'T|]>(array);
        let strides = NDArrayStrides(array);
        let offset = NDArrayOffset(array);
        let shape = NDArrayShape(array);

        // Now use AsNDArray2 to reconstruct, but with shape and strides
        // reversed.
        return AsNDArray2(data, strides, offset, shape);
    }

    function ConstantArray2<'T>(shape : (Int, Int), element : 'T) : [|'T|] {
        Fact(Fst(shape) >= 0, "First axis had negative length.");
        Fact(Snd(shape) >= 0, "Second axis had negative length.");

        // Here, we set a stride of zero to store everything as a single
        // element. Using the copy-and-update operator will require actually
        // allocating the whole array, but we can start off by "cheating."
        return AsNDArray2([element], [0, 0], 0, shape);
    }

>     function Shape2<'T>(array : [|'T|]) : (Int, Int) {

Reviewer: Are we good to go with Size2 instead?

Author: Done.

        // want to generalize this to allow arbitrary binary operators, and to
        // handle broadcasting between the two inputs.

        mutable data = [];
        let (nRows, nCols) = Shape2(left);
        for idxCol in 0..nCols - 1 {
            for idxRow in 0..nRows - 1 {
                set data += [left[(idxRow, idxCol)] * right[(idxRow, idxCol)]];
            }
        }
        return AsNDArray2(data, [1, nRows], 0, shape);
    }
}
```

# Implementation

**NB: Code samples in this section are intended as pseudocode only, and may not work directly as written.**

This proposal can be implemented with minimal new data structures in the Q# runtime, using an approach similar to the [NumPy library for Python](http://numpy.scipy.org/), the [NumSharp library for C#](https://github.com/SciSharp/NumSharp), or the [ndarray library for Rust](https://github.com/rust-ndarray/ndarray/issues/597).

In particular, each of these libraries represents multidimensional arrays by a data structure similar to the following:

```qsharp
newtype MultidimensionalArray<'T> = (
    Data: ['T],
    Offset: Int,
    Shape: [Int],
    Strides: [Int]
);
```

> Together, `::Offset` and `::Strides` specify how to transform multidimensional indices into a linear index for use with `::Data`:

Reviewer: Data here would grant access to the uncompressed data, i.e. it will contain data that is not part of the array, correct? We need to think carefully about how this would work with the reference counting. You grant access to data here that is not part of the array itself, meaning it might actually be possible that the items that are not used by the array are actually already freed and no longer exist.

Author: Ideally, that access should not be granted all the way through to user code (`::Data` was pseudocode only for the purpose of describing a possible implementation), but I agree this implementation strategy needs to be considered in the context of reference counting.

Reviewer: Sounds good, resolved per our discussion.

Author: Added a sentence to the proposal capturing this discussion.

By implementing multidimensional arrays in this way, we can reuse the existing infrastructure for immutable single-dimensional arrays.
Moreover, in many cases, multiple distinct multidimensional arrays can share the same `::Data` item without requiring a copy.
For example, in the variable binding `let view = array[0..2..., 0..2...];`, `view::Data` and `array::Data` can be the same single-dimensional array, as the difference between `view` and `data` can be expressed by only modifying `::Strides` and `::Shape`.
The cases where copies may still be required are when reshaping from more indices to less, when using `w/` to update slices, or if a particular intrinsic function or operation is implemented in simulation by interoperating with native libraries such as BLAS and LAPACK.

## Timeline

This proposal does not depend on any other proposals (though it can be made easier-to-use in combination with other proposals; see _Anticipated Interactions with Future Modifications_, below).

Required implementation steps:

- Adapt compiler to recognize new types, subscript expressions, copy-and-replace expressions, and new literal expressions.

> - Implement new data structures in QIR and simulation runtime to represent values of new type, and fundamental operations on new type (e.g.: `w/` expressions).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Implement new data structures in QIR and runtime to represent values of new type, and fundamental operations on new type (e.g.: `w/` expressions).
```

- Design, review, and approve API design for extensions to the `Microsoft.Quantum.Arrays namespace` to support the new feature.
- Implement new library functions from previous step.
- Document new multidimensional arrays in language specification and conceptual documentation.

# Further Considerations

## Related Mechanisms

This proposal generalizes the existing array feature in Q#.
As such, the new features introduced by this proposal are designed to keep to user expectations formed by existing features.
In particular:

- Like existing arrays, multidimensional arrays are immutable values.
- Mutability can be handled using `set ... w/= ...;` statements in the same fashion as existing 1D arrays.
- Multidimensional arrays can be used as collections in loops.

> - There are no subtyping relationships between array types. In particular, `[|'T|]` is not a subtype of `'T[][]` but a distinct type in its own right; nor is `('T => Unit is Adj)[,]` a subtype of `('T => Unit)[,]`.

Reviewer: We need to examine how the last two bullets work together carefully, see my comment further above.

Author: I don't think there's any inherent contradiction or tension there, for the same reason that `Range` and `[Int]` have no subtyping relationship to each other.

Reviewer: Sounds good, resolved per our discussion.

## Impact on Existing Mechanisms

This proposal would not modify or invalidate existing functionality (e.g.: `Int[][]` will continue to be a valid type in Q#), and thus is not a breaking change.

> If, in a future proposal, we were to unify multidimensional array with existing functionality using features outlined in _Anticipated Interactions with Future Modifications_, a breaking change would likely be required at that point in time.

Reviewer: Can you be more specific here and elaborate? What do you mean by unifying multi-dimensional array functionality with existing one when introducing future features? I don't see a breaking change that would be necessary, and we should make sure that none is needed before we go ahead with this proposal.

Author: If I recall, this points to library functionality, as there's a lot of type and rank suffixes needed in the library proposal (e.g.: `Dot22C` for multiplying two two-dimensional arrays of complex numbers). Will delete here, in any case.

let data = Concatenated2(0, // concatenate along the 0th (row) axis
    [ | 0, 1 | ],
    a
);
// data: [|Int|] = [
//     |0, 1|,
//     |2, 3|
// ];
```

Example 4:
Using the copy-and-replace operator to manipulate multidimensional arrays.

```qsharp
function ElementaryMatrix(
    (nRows : Int, nCols : Int), (idxRow : Int, idxCol : Int)
) : [|Double|] {
    return ConstantArray2((nRows, nCols), 0.0) w/ (idxRow, idxCol) <- 1.0;
}
```

Example 5:
Slicing multidimensional arrays by ranges.

```qsharp
let data = [
    |0, 1, 2|,
    |3, 4, 5|,
    |6, 7, 8|
];

// Slicing an index by a Range does not reduce the dimensionality
// of the resulting array.
let corners = data[0..2..2, 0..2..2];
// corners = [|0, 2|, |6, 8|] and is of type [|Int|]

// Subscripting by an Int reduces the dimensionality of the resulting array;
// here, since our index has one Int, the dimensionality reduces from
// [|Int|] to [Int].
let firstRow = data[0, ...];
// firstRow = [0, 1, 2]
// The same pattern holds no matter which index we subscript with an Int.
let firstColumn = data[..., 0];
// firstColumn = [0, 3, 6]

let data3 = [
    |

>         [|0, 1, 2|],

Reviewer: There seems to be a spare `[` and `]` here for the first item.

Author: Yep, looks like a typo on my part; thanks for catching that!

let data = [
    |0, 1, 2|,
    |3, 4, 5|,
    |6, 7, 8|
];

// Slicing does not reduce the dimensionality of the resulting array.
let corners = data[0..2..2, 0..2..2];
// corners = [|0, 2|, |6, 8|] and is of type [|Int|]

// Subscripting by an Int reduces the dimensionality of the resulting array;
// here, since our index has one Int, the dimensionality reduces from
// [|Int|] to [Int].
let firstRow = data[0, ...];
// firstRow = [0, 1, 2]
// The same pattern holds no matter which index we subscript with an Int.
let firstColumn = data[..., 0];
// firstColumn = [0, 3, 6]

let data3 = [
    |
        |0, 1, 2|,
        |3, 4, 5|,
        |6, 7, 8|
    |,

    |
        |9, 10, 11|,
        |12, 13, 14|,
        |15, 16, 17|
    |,

    |
        |18, 19, 20|,
        |21, 22, 23|,
        |24, 25, 26|
    |
];
let corners3 = data3[0..2..2, 0..2..2, 0..2..2];
// corners3 is of type [||Int||]
let firstPlane = data3[0, ..., ...];
// firstPlane is of type [|Int|]
let firstRowOfFirstPlane = data3[0, 0, ...];
// firstRowOfFirstPlane = [0, 1, 2] and is of type [Int]
```

Example 6:
Using multidimensional slices in copy-and-update expressions.

```qsharp
let zeros =[|0, size = (3, 3)|];

> let withCorners = zeros w/ (0..2..2, 0..2..2) <- [|1, 2|, |3, 4|];

Reviewer: One thing that is not explicitly stated and I think fine to just add here as a comment, is that the right hand side `[|1,2|,|3,4|]` must be a multidimensional array opposed to an array of arrays.

let withFirstColumn = zeros w/ (0..2, 0) <- [1, 2, 3];
// withFirstColumn = [|1, 0, 0|, |2, 0, 0|, |3, 0, 0|] and is of type [|Int|]
```

Example 7:
Iterating over multidimensional arrays.

```qsharp
let data3 = [
    |
        |0, 1, 2|,
        |3, 4, 5|,
        |6, 7, 8|
    |,

    |
        |9, 10, 11|,
        |12, 13, 14|,
        |15, 16, 17|
    |,

    |
        |18, 19, 20|,
        |21, 22, 23|,
        |24, 25, 26|
    |
];
// data3 is of type [||Int||].

for plane in data {
    // plane is of type [|Int|]
    for row in plane {
        // row is of type [Int]
        Message($"{row}");
    }

    Message("");
}
// Output
// ======
// [0, 1, 2]
// [3, 4, 5]
// [6, 7, 8]
//
// [9, 10, 11]
// [12, 13, 14]
// [15, 16, 17]
//
// [18, 19, 20]
// [21, 22, 23]
// [24, 25, 26]

// Iteration "on the left" is equivalent to iterating over the leftmost index
// of a multidimensional array:
let data2 = [
    |0, 1|,
    |2, 3|
];
// In particular, the following loops are identical up to that the idxRow
// variable is not defined in the second loop.
for idxRow in 0..Fst(Size2(data2)) - 1 {
    let row = data2[idxRow, ...];
    // ...
}
for row in data2 {
    // ...
}
```

> Example 7:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Example 8:
```

```qsharp
namespace Microsoft.Quantum.Arrays {
    open Microsoft.Quantum.Diagnostics;

    function Transposed2<'T>(array : [|'T|]) : [|'T|] {
        // Start by deconstructing the input using the internal intrinsic
        // functions from this proposal; see Implementation below.
        let data = NDArrayData<'T, [|'T|]>(array);
        let strides = NDArrayStridesUnsafe(array);
        let offset = NDArrayOffsetUnsafe(array);
        let size = NDArraySizeUnsafe(array);

        // Now use the internal AsNDArrayUnsafe function
        // to reconstruct, but with size and strides
        // reversed.
        return AsNDArrayUnsafe<'T, [|'T|]>(data, strides[...-1...], offset, size[...-1...]);
    }

    function ConstantArray2<'T>(size : (Int, Int), element : 'T) : [|'T|] {
        Fact(Fst(size) >= 0, "First axis had negative length.");
        Fact(Snd(size) >= 0, "Second axis had negative length.");

        // Here, we set a stride of zero to store everything as a single
        // element. Using the copy-and-update operator will require actually
        // allocating the whole array, but we can start off by "cheating."

>         return AsNDArrayUnsafe<'T, [|'T|]>([element], [0, 0], 0, size);

Reviewer: @cgranade You are using the AsNDArrayUnsafe in an inconsistent manner; size here is a tuple rather than an array, and the data array needs to have more than one element in general.
In Example 9 below, FoldedAlongAxis2 is not defined. I don't think either of those two examples needs or necessarily should be part of the language proposal; this really is the implementation and we should not have full pieces of the implementation in the proposal. I hence suggest to remove both Example 8 and 9 from the proposal.

Author: Sounds good, will drop both, then.

    }

    function Size2<'T>(array : [|'T|]) : (Int, Int) {
        let size = NDArraySizeUnsafe(array);
        return (size[0], size[1]);
    }

    function TimesD2(left : [|Double|], right : [|Double|]) : [|Double|] {
        // For simplicity, we presume that left and right already match each
        // other's size exactly. In an actual library implementation, we would
        // want to generalize this to allow arbitrary binary operators, and to
        // handle broadcasting between the two inputs.

        mutable data = [];
        let (nRows, nCols) = Size2(left);
        for idxCol in 0..nCols - 1 {
            for idxRow in 0..nRows - 1 {
                set data += [left[(idxRow, idxCol)] * right[(idxRow, idxCol)]];
            }
        }
        return AsNDArrayUnsafe<Double, [|Double|]>(data, [1, nRows], 0, [nRows, nCols]);
    }
}
```

> Example 8:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Example 9:
```

For example, a function implementing a matrix transpose need not modify `::Data`, but can reverse `::Strides` and `::Size`:

```qsharp
function Transposed2<'T>(array : [|'T|]) : [|'T|] {
    return array
        w/ Strides <- array::Strides[...-1...]
        w/ Size <- array::Size[...-1...];
}
```

Similarly, `array[..., 0..2...]` can be implemented by doubling `::Strides[1]`:

```qsharp
array[..., 0..2...]
// implemented by:
array
    w/ Strides <- [array::Strides[0], 2 * array::Strides[1]]
    w/ Size <- [array::Size[0], array::Size[1] / 2]
```

Reversing an axis can be implemented by using negative strides and modifications to `::Offset`.

By implementing multidimensional arrays in this way, we can reuse the existing infrastructure for immutable single-dimensional arrays.
Moreover, in many cases, multiple distinct multidimensional arrays can share the same `::Data` item without requiring a copy.
For example, in the variable binding `let view = array[0..2..., 0..2...];`, `view::Data` and `array::Data` can be the same single-dimensional array, as the difference between `view` and `data` can be expressed by only modifying `::Strides` and `::Size`.

> The cases where copies may still be required are when reshaping from more indices to less, when using `w/` to update slices, or if a particular intrinsic function or operation is implemented in simulation by interoperating with native libraries such as BLAS and LAPACK.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The cases where copies may still be required are when constructing new arrays using a copy-and-update expression, or if a particular intrinsic function or operation is implemented in simulation by interoperating with native libraries such as BLAS and LAPACK, or when truncating the array.
```

```

#### Handling runtime failure modalities

Some of the type conversions described above can fail at runtime, decreasing the safety of Q# programs.
To assist, the discriminated union and type-parameterized UDT feature suggestions (https://github.com/microsoft/qsharp-compiler/issues/406) could be used to represent the possibility of runtime failures in a typesafe fashion.

For example, the `JaggedAsRectangular2` function above could fail if its input is not actually rectangular.
Using `Maybe<'T>`, we could represent this directly:

```qsharp
function MaybeJaggedAsRectangular2<'T>(input : [['T]]) : Maybe<'T[,]> {
    if (IsRectangular2(input)) {
        // convert here
    } else {
        return Maybe<[|'T|]>::None();
    }
}
```

If in a particular application, it is definitely the case that a given jagged array can be converted, the `Maybe` can be unwrapped using a function that attempts to match on values of type `Maybe<'T>`:

```qsharp
function Forced<'T>(maybe : Maybe<'T>) : 'T {
    return maybe match {
        Some(value) -> value,
        None() -> fail "was None()"
    };
}
```

#### Removing type suffixes with bounded polymorphism

> Were the bounded polymorphism feature suggested at https://github.com/microsoft/qsharp-compiler/issues/557 to be adopted, the different "overloads" for the library functions suggested in this proposal could be consolidated into a smaller number of concepts that then get implemented by each of `'T[,]`, `'T[,,]`, and so forth.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Were the bounded polymorphism feature suggested at https://github.com/microsoft/qsharp-compiler/issues/557 to be adopted, the different "overloads" for the library functions suggested in this proposal could be consolidated into a smaller number of concepts that then get implemented by each of `[|'T|]`, `[||'T||]`, and so forth.
```

> Were the bounded polymorphism feature suggested at https://github.com/microsoft/qsharp-compiler/issues/557 to be adopted, the different "overloads" for the library functions suggested in this proposal could be consolidated into a smaller number of concepts that then get implemented by each of `[|'T|]`, `[||'T||]`, and so forth.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Were the bounded polymorphism feature suggested at https://github.com/microsoft/qsharp-compiler/issues/557 to be adopted, the different "overloads" for the library functions could be consolidated into a smaller number of concepts that then get implemented by each of `[|'T|]`, `[||'T||]`, and so forth.
```

As an alternative, one could consider not adding any new types to Q#, but rather extending `w/` to act on values of type `'T[][]`, `'T[][][]` using tuple indices:

```qsharp
// Construct the elementary matrix 𝑒₀₁ = |0⟩⟨1| as the jagged array
// [[0, 1, 0], [0, 0, 0], [0, 0, 0]].
let e01 = ConstantArray(3, ConstantArray(3, 0.0)) w/ (0, 1) <- 1.0;
```

#### Alternative Syntax for Multidimensional Literals

As an alternative, one could consider keeping the new types and index expressions suggested by this proposal, but modifying the definition of multidimensional literals.

For example, alternative delimiters could be used to separate rows, planes, and so forth:

```qsharp
let data3 = [
    0, 1;  // Separate rows with ;
    2, 3;; // Separate planes with ;;

    4, 5;
    6, 7
];
// data3: [||Int||]
```

Other delimiters than `;` could be considered to avoid overloading statement separators.
For example, it may be considered less confusing to reuse the `|` character from `?|` expressions or the `\` character from string escapes:

```qsharp
let x = [
    0.0, 1.0 |
    1.0, 0.0
];

let z = [
    1.0, 0.0 \\ // LaTeX-style notation
    0.0, -1.0
];
```

> These alternatives can possibly be combined with `[| |]`:

Reviewer: It is not clear to me how the snippet below illustrate how `[| |]` can be combined with the alternative of using `;` to terminate a row.

Author: Agreed, I think that made more sense with earlier versions of t he proposal... I'll go on and drop this comment, given that `[| |]` doesn't really combine well with `[ ...; ... ]`.

---
description: Proposal for multidimensional array types in Q#
author: Chris Granade
date: 2021-03-01
---

> # QEP 3: Multi-dimensional arrays

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# QEP 3: Multidimensional arrays
```

];
// shor: (Pauli, Int)[][]
```

Example 4:
A prior distribution over phases represented as an array of double-precision real numbers.

```qsharp
open Microsoft.Quantum.Arrays;
open Microsoft.Quantum.Convert;

// suppose likelihood is a function of type Int -> Double.
let nPoints = 1000;
let prior = ConstantArray(nPoints, 1.0 / IntAsDouble(nPoints));
mutable posterior = prior;
for ((idx, pr) in Enumerated(posterior)) {
    set posterior w/= idx <- posterior[idx] * likelihood(idx);
}
set posterior = PNormalized(posterior, 1.0);
```

Example 5:
A function that returns an elementary matrix (that is, a matrix with a one in the (𝑖, 𝑗)th element and zeros elsewhere).

```qsharp
open Microsoft.Quantum.Arrays;

function ElementaryMatrix<'T>(
    (nRows : Int, nColumns : Int),
    (idxRow : Int, idxCol : Int),
    zero : 'T, one : 'T
) : 'T[][] {
    mutable matrix = ConstantArray(
        nRows,
        ConstantArray(nCols, zero)
    );
    return matrix w/ row <- (matrix[row] w/ col <- one);
}

let e01 = ElementaryMatrix((2, 2), (0, 1), 0.0, 1.0);
// e01: Double[][] = [[0.0, 1.0], [0.0, 0.0]]
```

### Proposed Modification

> Building on the utility of 1-D array notation, this suggestion proposes modifying Q# to include new multidimensional array types `[|'T`|], `[||'T||]`, and so forth. Like values of type `'T[]`, these new multidimensional would also be immutable, and could be manipulated by using the subscript (`[]`) and copy-and-update (`w/`) operators.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Building on the utility of 1-D array notation, this suggestion proposes modifying Q# to include new multidimensional array types `[|'T|]`, `[||'T||]`, and so forth. Like values of type `'T[]`, these new multidimensional would also be immutable, and could be manipulated by using the subscript (`[]`) and copy-and-update (`w/`) operators.
```

For any type `'T`, this proposal introduces a new two-dimensional array type `[|'T|]`, a three-dimensional array type `[||'T||]`, and so forth.
For consistency with these new types, this proposal also introduces `['T]` as alternative notation for `'T[]`; we will use new notation for `'T[]` in the remainder of the proposal.

New values of type `[|'T|]` can be written as literals using `[| ... |]` delimiters instead of `[]`, while literals of type `[||'T||]` can be written using `[|| ... ||]` delimiters (see example 1 below).

> The `|` and `|` delimeters occuring within square brackets can be thought of as denoting a rectangular grid, and as constraining one level of indexing to be rectangular.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `|` and `|` delimiters occurring within square brackets can be thought of as denoting a rectangular grid, and as constraining one level of indexing to be rectangular.
```

Similarly, new values of type `[|'T|]` can also be obtained by using the library functions in https://github.com/microsoft/QuantumLibraries/issues/408; e.g., `JaggedAsRectangular2([[2, 3], [4, 5]])` is equivalent to the literal `[|2, 3|, |4, 5|]`.

Within multidimensional array literals, it is a _compile-time_ error to declare jagged subarrays, such as in Example 1, below.

> It is similarly a compile-time error to use a non-literal array expression for part of a multi-dimensional array literal, as is shown in Example 3, below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is similarly a compile-time error to use a non-literal array expression for part of a multidimensional array literal, as is shown in Example 3, below.
```

As with one-dimensional arrays, multidimensional arrays can also be subscripted by ranges.
Each axis of a multidimensional arrays can be sliced by _either_ a value of type `Range` or a value of type `Int`; for example, `(Int, Int)`, `(Range, Int)`, `(Int, Range)`, and `(Range, Range)` are valid subscripts for a value of type `[|'T|]`.
As shown in Example 5 below, for each `Int` in an index tuple, the dimensionality (aka rank) of the array is reduced by one.
That is, indexing a `[|'T|]` by `(Range, Range)` returns a rank-2 array (`[|'T|]`), while indexing by `(Int, Range)` or `(Range, Int)` returns an ordinary rank-1 array (`['T]`).

Just as with indices like `(Int, Int)` and `(Int, Int, Int)`, subscripts that return slices can also be used in copy-and-update expressions, as shown in Example 6.
Multidimensional indices can also be used with the copy-and-update operator (`w/`) to create a new array that replaces one or more specific element(s) of a multidimensional array, as shown in Example 4 below.
In the case of `w/` operators, the `()` around index tuples cannot be dropped.

> When using values of type `Range` to index one or more axes in a multidimensional array, `...` is shorthand for the value `0..1..(n - 1)` where `n` is the length of the axis being indexed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When using values of type `Range` to index one or more axes in a multidimensional array the contextual `Range` expression `...`, e.g., is shorthand for the value `0..1..(n - 1)` where `n` is the length of the axis being indexed. The same [contextual expressions](https://github.com/microsoft/qsharp-language/blob/main/Specifications/Language/3_Expressions/ContextualExpressions.md#contextual-and-omitted-expressions) as for the one-dimensional case are valid for each dimension in the array. 
```

When used in `for` loops, multidimensional arrays iterate "on the left," yielding loop variables of one rank lower than the array being looped over, as shown in Example 7, below.

Finally, to support multidimensional arrays, this proposal also suggests extending the `Microsoft.Quantum.Arrays` namespace with the following functions that can be used to implement libraries for working with multidimensional arrays:

- `internal function AsNDArrayUnsafe<'TElement, 'TArray>(data : ['TElement], strides : [Int], offset : Int, size : [Int]) : 'TArray`
- `internal function NDArrayDataUnsafe<'TElement, 'TArray>(data : 'TArray) : ['TElement]`
- `internal function NDArrayStridesUnsafe<'TArray>(data : 'TArray) : [Int]`
- `internal function NDArraySizeUnsafe<'TArray>(data : 'TArray) : [Int]`
- `internal function NDArrayOffsetUnsafe<'TArray>(data : 'TArray) : Int`

> Each of these five functions would be `body intrinsic;`, and together form the contract between the runtime and the core Q# libraries needed to support this proposed feature (see Example 7, below). By necessity, these functions are "unsafe," in that direct access to these functions would allow violating invariants of multidimensional arrays or bypass the type system to expose runtime failures, necessitating the `internal` modifier. In particular, these functions may be given access to elements that do not exist insofar as Q# user code is concerned (i.e.: are not accessible given the current strides, shapes, and offsets); these elements may have reference counts of zero, such that referring to these elements is undefined behavior. It is the responsibility of the Q# foundation, core, and standard libraries to ensure that undefined behavior is not exposed to user code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each of these five functions would be `body intrinsic;`, and together form the contract between the runtime and the core Q# libraries needed to support this proposed feature (see Example 7, below). By necessity, these functions are "unsafe," in that direct access to these functions would allow violating invariants of multidimensional arrays or bypass the type system to expose runtime failures, necessitating the `internal` modifier. In particular, these functions may be given access to elements that do not exist insofar as Q# user code is concerned (i.e.: are not accessible given the current strides, shapes, and offsets); these elements may have reference counts of zero, such that referring to these elements results in undefined behavior. It is the responsibility of the Q# foundation, core, and standard libraries to ensure that undefined behavior is not exposed to user code.
```

For instance, the "diagonal" elements of a 2-D array can be extracted into a 1-D array using `Diagonal2<'T>(array : [|'T|]) : ['T]`, as shown in example 8, below.
Please see https://github.com/microsoft/QuantumLibraries/issues for more details about library functions for working with multidimensional arrays.

#### Examples

Example 1:
Declaring and indexing into variables of type `[|Double|]` and `[||Int||]` using literals.

```qsharp
let z = [
    // Inside [] delimiters, | | delimiters refer not to array expressions, but
    // to "rows" of the two-dimensional array literal.
    | 1.0, 0.0 |,
    | 0.0, -1.0 |
];
Message($"{z[0, 1]}"); // ← 0.0

// It is a compile-time error for the "rows" denoted by | ... | to be uneven:
let incorrect = [
    | 1.0, 2.0 |,
    | 10.0, 20.0, 30.0 | // ← error, since this would declare a "ragged" array
];

let data = [
    // We can nest two levels of | ... | to get three-dimensional arrays.
    |
        |0, 1|,
        |2, 3|
    |,

    |
        |4, 5|,
        |6, 7|
    |
];

> Message($"{data[0, 1, 0]}"); // ← 6

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Message($"{data[1, 1, 0]}"); // ← 6
```

```

Example 2:
Mixing 1D and multidimensional arrays.

```qsharp
// Here, we declare the first two levels of indexing as being rectangular,
// resulting in a three-dimensional array.
let data = [
    |
        // After rows, [] denote arrays as elements again.
        | [0], [1, 2] |,
        | [3, 4, 5], [6, 7, 8, 9] |
    |,

    |
        | [10, 11, 12, 13, 14], [15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20] |,
        | [21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27], [28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35] |
    |
];

> // data: [||[Int]||] (that is, a three-dimensional array of arrays of integers)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// data is of type [||[Int]||] (that is, a three-dimensional array of arrays of integers)
```

> // Get the zero-th "plane," first "row", zeroth "column," and third element.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// Get the zero-th "plane," first "row", zero-th "column," and third element.
```

Message($"{data[0, 1, 0][2]}"); // ← 5
```

> Example 3:

Reviewer: @cgranade What exactly is the signature of Concatenated2? 
It is hard to follow the example without the signature of Concatenated2, and I am not sure the signature that the example implies is indeed the one you intended. Could you please revise that example?

Using expressions as subarrays of multidimensional arrays results in a compile-time error.

```qsharp
let a = [2, 3];
// The following is a compile-time error, as `|0, 1|` is not an expression
// independent of its surrounding `[]` brackets.
let data = [
    | 0, 1 |,
    a
];
// Using a new library function that can `fail` at runtime works, however.
let data = Concatenated2(0, // concatenate along the 0th (row) axis
    [ | 0, 1 | ],
    a
);
// data: [|Int|] = [
//     |0, 1|,
//     |2, 3|
// ];
```

Example 4:

> Using the copy-and-replace operator to manipulate multidimensional arrays.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using the copy-and-update operator to manipulate multidimensional arrays.
```

```qsharp
function ElementaryMatrix(
    (nRows : Int, nCols : Int), (idxRow : Int, idxCol : Int)
) : [|Double|] {

>     return ConstantArray2((nRows, nCols), 0.0) w/ (idxRow, idxCol) <- 1.0;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    return [| 0.0, size = (nRows, nCols) |] w/ (idxRow, idxCol) <- 1.0;
```

}
```

Example 5:

> Slicing multidimensional arrays by ranges.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Slicing multidimensional arrays.
```

```qsharp
let data = [
    |0, 1, 2|,
    |3, 4, 5|,
    |6, 7, 8|
];

> // Slicing an index by a Range does not reduce the dimensionality

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// Slicing does not reduce the dimensionality of the resulting array.
```

> // of the resulting array.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

// withCorners = [|1, 0, 2|, |0, 0, 0|, |3, 0, 4|] and is of type [|Int|].

let withFirstRow = zeros w/ (0, 0..2) <- [1, 2, 3];
// withFirstRow = [|1, 2, 3|, |0, 0, 0|, |0, 0, 0|] and is of type [|Int|].

let withFirstColumn = zeros w/ (0..2, 0) <- [1, 2, 3];
// withFirstColumn = [|1, 0, 0|, |2, 0, 0|, |3, 0, 0|] and is of type [|Int|]
```

Example 7:
Iterating over multidimensional arrays.

```qsharp
let data3 = [
    |
        |0, 1, 2|,
        |3, 4, 5|,
        |6, 7, 8|
    |,

    |
        |9, 10, 11|,
        |12, 13, 14|,
        |15, 16, 17|
    |,

    |
        |18, 19, 20|,
        |21, 22, 23|,
        |24, 25, 26|
    |
];
// data3 is of type [||Int||].

for plane in data {
    // plane is of type [|Int|]
    for row in plane {
        // row is of type [Int]
        Message($"{row}");
    }

    Message("");
}
// Output
// ======
// [0, 1, 2]
// [3, 4, 5]
// [6, 7, 8]
//
// [9, 10, 11]
// [12, 13, 14]
// [15, 16, 17]
//
// [18, 19, 20]
// [21, 22, 23]
// [24, 25, 26]

// Iteration "on the left" is equivalent to iterating over the leftmost index
// of a multidimensional array:
let data2 = [
    |0, 1|,

>     |2, 3

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    |2, 3|
```

];
// In particular, the following loops are identical up to that the idxRow
// variable is not defined in the second loop.
for idxRow in 0..Fst(Size2(data2)) - 1 {
    let row = data2[idxRow, ...];
    // ...
}

> for row in array {

Reviewer: ```suggestion
for row in data2 {
```
